Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to look at the deep structure of the
rational numbers the rational numbers have a
very interesting and rich structure that goes
beyond what's usually studied in schools and
universities but really ought to be much wider
known this is important for us for a number
of reasons first of all because the rational
numbers are the framework in which this attempt
to create real numbers starts out where we try to
create real numbers as Koshi sequences of rational
numbers so the rational numbers are providing the
framework for this game to be played it's a
game that doesn't work I claim but we need to
understand all aspects of the game especially how
we start the rational numbers are also important
for us because ultimately I'm going to try to
make the case that the rational numbers are the
heart of mathematics when we do mathematics the
rational numbers should be almost always foremost
in our mind we can do analysis and differential
geometry differential equations algebraic geometry
combinatorics number theory who knows what we
can do it with rational numbers we do not need
real numbers this is a point I'm going to try
to slowly make as time goes by so the rational
numbers are really the heart of mathematics and I
think this is a major reorientation of mathematics
in this coming century very very important all
right so let's review some basic things about
rational numbers first of all here's the type that
I I give it are a t a rational number is a pair of
integers a over B where B has to not be 0 we have
this very crucial property of equality when two
rational numbers are the same a over B equals C
over D precisely when ad minus BC equals zero one
other ones when this times this equals this times
this we have this alternate somewhat more familiar
notation instead of writing the bar slanted I'll
often write it straight like this which is more
convenient if the numbers are big we have a notion
of positivity of rational numbers on the number
line while everything that's to the right of zero
or including zero might be called positive and a
over B is positive precisely when a and B are both
positive integers or when they're both negative
integers and is that notion of positivity that is
ultimately responsible for the order structure of
the rational numbers now the fact that we can say
that R is less than or equal to s that means that
s minus R is positive allows us to compare
any two rational numbers and say which one
is bigger which one is smaller then of course we
have the four main operations which all students
the mathematics ought to learn how to learn very
well and it takes some some serious dedication
to become familiar with arithmetic with rational
numbers and it's very important it's probably the
most important thing for primary school students
to master the arithmetic is concrete and precise
we can say exactly what an answer should be we
can check to make sure that someone's made a
calculation correctly if I want to add 2/3 and
1/4 I have to do some work 2/3 plus 1/4 I have
to get a common denominator of 12 so that's 8 12
s plus 3 12s that's going to be 11 12 so 2/3 plus
1/4 is 11 12 and probably actually check that
11 over 12 is actually in reduced form in other
words that there's no common factor through the
common factor I should remove the common factor
to get in to reduced form that way we can easily
check that a calculation has been done correctly
compare that to the situation with so called real
numbers it's like a night and day difference with
real numbers one is talking all the time and
rarely actually computing as I mentioned to
you many times before if I ask you what pi plus e
is there's no corresponding actual rolling up of
the sleeves and getting down and making some
calculation as there is for rational numbers
it's simply an empty kind of well pi plus e is PI
plus e that would be ridiculous that would be like
asking a primary school student what is 2/3 plus
1/4 and getting the answer the answer is 2/3 plus
1/4 such as the vacuity of real number arithmetic
ok so there is the rational numbers here is our
standard geometrical understanding of it along
the number line we want to go now further today
we want to understand the deep structure of the
rational numbers since the number line is rather
large it's nice to focus on just one part of it
to try to delve more deeply into the structure
so let's have a look at the interval 0 1 which
contains fractions of the form a over B where both
of them are positive integers and a is less than
or equal to B for example 0 over 1 1/5 2/5 3/5 4/5
1 over 1 just the same as 5 over 5 here all the
multiples of 1/5 all the fractions between 0 & 1
whose denominator is 5 and an obvious statement
to make is that there are an unending number of
rational numbers in this interval unending meaning
that we can always add some more that we haven't
already listed if we try to list all the rational
numbers in 0 1 we do not end up finishing there's
always more to be added maybe we could say
that there's an infinite number if we have a
metaphysical orientation but it's probably best
just to say that we can keep on adding more and
more and more and more until well until we run
out of memory or run run out of room or run out of
time for example an unending sequence of rational
numbers in the interval is 1 over 1 1 over 2 1
over 3 1 over 4 1 over 5 starting here then 1/2
1/3 1/4 1/5 1/6 1/7 1/8 and so on getting closer
and closer to 0 clearly there is as many of these
as there are natural numbers so even though the
interval 0 1 may look relatively small it contains
within it sequences of rational numbers that are
just as big or just as unending as are the full
sequence of natural numbers which we usually think
of as trailing off beyond our view so it's a very
rich object this interval 0 1 of rational numbers
so here now our two theorems that tell us a little
bit more about how dense the rational numbers are
in this interval 0 1 the first theorem is that if
you have any two rational numbers R and s then the
average which is defined to be R plus s divided
by 2 that lies between them meaning that for
example if R is less than or equal to s so this
happens to be the smaller one then this number R
plus s over 2 is between R and s in other words
it satisfies that inequality as I'm going to be
doing increasingly as we move on to somewhat more
sophisticated topics I'm going to give you these
kinds of things to check as exercises so we're
not going to go through the details of things like
this they're relatively unproblematic give you a
good chance to practice your your algebraic skills
this of course is pretty obvious intuitively
you have two numbers like 3 & 5 the average
is 4 which is between them this second theorem
is along the same lines but it's somewhat less
familiar it concerns two positive rational numbers
R and s and we're going to assume that R is equal
to a over B and s equals C over D in reduced form
and I remind you that that means that there are
no common factors and that B is positive so no
common factors between a and B no common factors
between C and D now the median of these two
rational numbers is this expression it's a plus
C over B plus D we've added the two numerators
and divided by the sum of the two denominators
now sometimes mistakenly young students think
that this is the way to add fractions this is
definitely not the way we add fractions but
this operation is still quite interesting
and this theorem asserts that this mediant
lies between the two rational numbers R and
s so for example if a over B is less than
or equal to C over D then the mediant is
sandwiched between them very nice property so
there's two ways of finding a rational number
between two given rational numbers we can
take the average or we can take the median
but we need to have the rational numbers in
reduced form to be able to to make that work
there is a much more general idea that extends
the idea of an average this is the idea of a
weighted average this is also a very important
understanding so first let's observe that if we
have a rational number lambda between 0 & 1 then
also 1 minus lambda is between 0 & 1 all right so
now we have this theorem suppose we have two
rational numbers R and s and they can be any
rational numbers and let's suppose that R is less
than or equal to s then for any lambda between 0
and 1 this particular combination is between R
and s the combination is 1 minus lambda times
R plus lambda times s so the two coefficients
that we have here are both in the range 0 to
1 and they happen to add up to 1 this is often
called a convex combination some kind of weighted
average in the special case when lambda is equal
to 1/2 then this becomes just the average of R
and s so the picture that we had here is here's
our number line and here's some rational number
R and another rational number s and over here I
have the interval 0 1 which of course is also on
this number line but it might be to the left or
might be to the right some ways so I just put it
over here and we're imagining some number lambda
which is between 0 & 1 then given such a lambda
what we can do is we can take this combination
1 minus lambda times R plus lambda times s and
that turns out to be a number between R and
s which has the same sort of proportional
relationship to R and s as does lambda 2 0 and 1
so for example if lambda is equal to 1/2 then we
exactly midpoint when lambda is a quarter then we
get a number that's over here that's a 1/4 of the
way along that's 3/4 R plus 1/4 s on the other
hand if lambda was 14 over 15 let's say in other
words a value pretty close to 1 over there then
the corresponding convex combination is weighted
towards s so it's in the ratio of 14 to 1 so
you can see that in the extreme case when lambda
equals 1 we recover s and when lambda equals 0 we
get R and so as we move lambda from here to here
this combination runs from here to here and this
is a way of matching up any two intervals this
is a fabulous aspect of rational numbers that
in fact any two intervals pretty well look the
same even if one interval is very small and the
other interval is very big to make that a little
bit clearer let's consider this convex combination
of R and s let's call it T if we solve for lambda
well we can bring the R that's on this side
to this side giving us t minus R and then the
remaining terms here we can factor as lambda times
s minus R s here the minus R there and then we can
solve for lambda lambda is then T minus R over
s minus R and we see that so long as R is less
than s in other words that they're not equal this
denominator is not going to be zero so that means
for every T in RS we can solve for lambda in other
words we could find the lambda so that T can be
written as a combination of R and s it's not hard
to see that this lambda is actually between zero
and want to leave that to you as an exercise
so what that's telling us is that if we have
an interval say r1 s1 then every point in this
interval every rational point of course which
is the only kinds of points we're talking about
every point in this interval or every rational
number between r1 and s1 is matched up to a number
lambda between 0 & 1 through this correspondence
through the correspondence that takes lambda
to the combination 1 minus lambda times r1 plus
lambda times s1 so this works both ways given a
lambda we can find this number T and given a T we
can solve for the corresponding lambda by using
this relation so this is a complete matching up
between points or numbers in this interval and
numbers in this interval now I don't want to
frame this in terms of sets I don't want to
say that this set has the same size as this
set because there's arguably an infinite number
of things in these sets that to me is not proper
mathematics I'm simply making the statement that
for every rational number here we can associate
a rational number here and conversely for every
rational number here we can correspond a rational
number here so there's a pairing up or matching
up of rational numbers between this interval and
this interval and the size of this interval is
immaterial he is much smaller interval r2 s2 and
exactly the same story applies this interval 0
1 is still in correspondence with this smaller
interval r2 s2 so this number lambda here still
corresponds to that combination 1 minus lambda R
1 plus lambda s2 so as a consequence of that we
see that arithmetic aliy all intervals are the
same this interval is completely matched up with
0 1 this interval is completely matched up with
0 1 so it follows that these two intervals can
be matched up we can associate to every rational
number in this interval you Niq rational number
in that interval and conversely given the one
here we can go back here and we can do that
sort of via this intermediate lambda in zero
one so the idea of the size of an interval is a
little bit illusory small intervals have just as
much complexity in them as do large intervals by
subdividing an interval into smaller intervals we
are not really getting something that's simpler
the complexity level is still there even if we've
magnified quite a lot so the rational numbers
have this cascading or kaleidoscopic aspect as
you as you magnify what you see is pretty well
similar to what you got at the higher level so
it's sort of infinitely divisible infinitely rich
as we magnify as we go down and look at clip more
and more closely at smaller and smaller intervals
and that of course gives us some justification for
studying the interval 0 1 very carefully because
if we understand that interval very well then we
can pretty well understand any other interval 2
so let's have a closer look a deeper look at the
interval 0 to 1 so we're talking about rational
numbers which are bigger than or equal to 0 and
less than or equal to 1 let's start listing some
of these rational numbers the simplest ones are 0
and 1 themselves and if we write them as fractions
or rational numbers we get 0 over 1 1 over 1 and
here's a picture of just those two they are the
endpoints of this interval or the next thing they
might occur to you is to divide the interval into
two pieces so introduce the midpoint 1/2 now we
have 3 points 0 1/2 and 1 if we write them out
serve in standard form 0 over 2 1 over 2 2 over
2 then another thing we could do is we could
divide the original interval into three equal
pieces giving us 0 over 3 1/3 2/3 and 3 over 3 or
1 again well we could divide into 4 equal pieces
0 a quarter 1/2 which is the same as 2/4 3/4 four
quarters or into five equal pieces 0 1/5 2/5 3/5
4/5 and 1 and it's clear that we can carry on this
way and eventually every rational number in this
interval will appear at some row as we go down and
typically it's the denominator that tells us what
row we should be at the bigger the denominator
the further down in this tabulation the rational
number will appear also there's duplication
however this is not a unique list so for
example 1/2 appears here and it also appears here
under 2 over 4 it will also appear in the next row
as 3 over 6 and of course for example in extreme
case 0 is appearing in every row 1 is appearing in
every row so there's a lot of duplication here we
are listing all the rational numbers this way but
there's a lot of duplication but this is a very
good way of thinking in terms of the complexity
of the rational numbers in terms of thinking
of them as being arranged in levels that's
an interesting very simple idea so let's make a
definition let's say that a rational number are
say in the range 0 to 1 is a level n precisely
when the reduced form of of R is M over N in
other words when the denominator is and when we've
reduced it into sort of standard form so this n is
always going to be a natural number one two three
four and so on because I remind you that even if
we have a negative number the standard form of
it we agree involves positive denominators we
always put the negative sign if there is one up
in the numerator so for example 0 over 1 and 1
over 1 R of level 1 3 over 7 and 143 over 7 R of
level 7 of course this is not between 0 & 1 but
actually the definition applies to any rational
number R once you reduce it you just look at the
denominator and say it's of level n where n is the
denominator these numbers 3 over 4 minus 2 over 8
42 over 24 they're all of level 4 this one this
one is obviously at level 4 why is this one at
level 4 because it's the same as minus 1/4 there
it's in reduced form and then the denominator is
4 here there's a common factor of 6 if we divide
that out we get 7 over 4 so again it's of level
4 because in this reduced form there's a 4 in the
denominator this now brings us to the interesting
idea of a fairy sequence side you know it F sub
n the fairy sequence F sub n consists of all
rational numbers are in the interval 0 1 which are
of level 1 to level n in order in increasing order
so we're looking not just at the numbers of level
n but the numbers that are of level anything up
to and including n so it could be level 1 could
be level two could be level 3 all the way up to
level n we're going to put all those numbers
together and then we're going to order them in
increasing order so the fairy sequence of level 1
F sub 1 just 0 over 1 + 1 over 1 with F sub 2 we
in the numbers of level two so we only get one
new one a half because we already have zero and
one from the previous level then when we go down
to f3 with considering all numbers of levels 1
2 & 3 so we include 1/3 and 2/3 we have to put
them in order we get something like this so f so
for 0 1/4 1/3 1/2 2/3 3/4 and 1 so these are all
the fractions between 0 & 1 whose denominators are
less than or equal to 4 here are all the fractions
with denominators less than or equal to 5 here are
the ones with denominator is less than or equal
to 6 now we can keep on going so this is a fairy
sequence now rather interesting property of these
is that we can go from one to the next in a very
simple way by using the idea of a mediant what
we do is we look along the list and we look at
a Jason tour neighboring elements in the sequence
and we find the medians of those neighbors and if
we find a median that has a denominator less than
or equal to the next level in this case 5 will
include that and we'll put it exactly between the
two adjacent neighbors that they came from so the
median gets fitted between its two parents so to
speak so for example 0 and 1/4 well 0 is really 0
over 1 when you write it in reduced form so 0 over
1 1 over 4 the median of that I remind you you add
the numerators you add the denominators you can
get 1 over 5 so we insert 1 over 5 between 0 and
1/4 the median of 1/4 and 1/3 would be 2 over 7
but seven has a denominator which is bigger than
five so we're not going to include that mediant so
we'll just have one quarter and one-third however
the median of one-third and one-half is two-fifths
that is allowed because this denominator is less
than or equal to five so we put in two-fifths we
put it in between the 1/3 and the one-half so to
go from one to the next is relatively simple it
just involves inserting some medians going through
seeing which medians have denominators or are
of level N and inserting them in the right spot
so for example we also inserted 3/5 between 1/2
and 2/3 and we've inserted 4/5 between 3/4 and 1
these are the fairy sequences this is the lovely
rule involving medians that allows us to go from
one sequence to the next sequence the fairy
sequences have a lovely connection to a topic
that we've discussed much earlier in this series
to the topic of forward circles which goes back
to math foundations 14 so you can have a look at
math foundations 14 and remind you yourself about
what a forward circle is but let me tell you in
any case this is a way of visualizing rational
numbers by assigning to every rational number a
circle a circle in the plane and I'm going to draw
the forward circles in a slightly different way
that I did in math foundations 14 in that video
I had the smaller circles up here I'm going to put
them down here today so here's the usual x-axis 0
1 2 3 y-axis height 1 and the first thing that
we do is we draw a circle centered at each of
the integer points and that circle has diameter
1 so it goes up to this line y equals 1 and these
circles are nicely fitting together you're just
touching there one of them centered at each of
the integer values now what we do is we extend
that picture by drawing more circles so for any
point are any rational number P over Q where P and
Q are in reduced form we're going to draw a circle
above that point with diameter 1 over Q squared so
for example over the point or the number 1/2 we're
going to draw a circle just sitting on the line
right above that point whose diameter is well we
have to take the denominator which is 2 and square
it so diameter 1/4 that means that this circle
will go up to the line y equals 1/4 and that's the
same size as this circle above 3 halves or above 5
halves and then it turns out that this circle is
exactly tangent to not only the x axis but also
to these bigger unit circles that we had drawn
previously so it just fits right in there in a
nice way that studied by the great Greek geometry
Polonius several millennia ago okay but we do that
not just for 1/2 but we do that for any rational
point so for example for 2/3 we're going to draw
a circle whose diameter is 1 over 9 because the
denominator here is 3 and I'm going to square the
denominator so it's 1/9 so this line here the red
one is the line y equals 1/9 and that's just the
top of this circle here over 1/3 this one over
2/3 this one over 4/3 is this one over 5/3 and
so on okay and then say the next-biggest circles
that we draw the ones over 1/4 they're going to
have diameter 1/16 there's one there and there's
one there and there's also some more over here
the pattern repeats with every integer so you can
just look at the pattern from zero to one you see
pretty well everything there is to see so what
we get with these forward circles is there is
completely remarkable phenomena that all of
these circles that we draw are disjoint they
may be tangent but they don't actually overlap
and they don't actually overlap and well the
fairy sequences that we just talked about in the
previous page are intimately connected with this
picture so the fairy sequence f n is all those
circles meeting y equals 1 over N squared over 0
1 so what we do is we look at a line say the line
y equals 1 and that touches two circles the one
over zero and one so that's the fairy sequence
f1 then when we go to N equals 2 we talk about
the line y equals 1/4 there it is right there
and as we look across here we bump into first
this circle and then we meet this circle just
tangentially and then this circle corresponding
to 0 1/2 and 1 we go down a little bit further to
1/9 now we get 0 1/3 then we cross the one half
circle then we touch the 2/3 circle and then we
get to the 1 circle so we're getting that fairy
sequence 0 1/3 1/2 2/3 1 we went to the next level
down which would be height y equals 1 over 16 then
we would touch some more circles we would touch
this one quarter circle and also this 3 quarter
circle and if we went one more we would touch the
two fifths circle also the one fifth circle which
I haven't drawn maybe I'll play it in there
here's one fifth and also on this side 4/5
so that's that's what you get when you look
across all these forward circles at a certain
height we're getting the f5 fairy sequence so what
we see here is that the further down we go the
more detail we see the more of these small little
bubbles corresponding to bigger rational numbers
we get the rational numbers form this endless
foam of increasingly small little bubbles more
and more of them finer and finer structure and
the further down we go the more of them we pick
up it's a little bit like having a magnifying
glass or our microscope we're looking in more
and more detail we can see more and more points
the points that we're actually seeing correspond
to rational numbers with bigger and bigger
denominators so they're in fact getting more
and more complicated more and more difficult to
write down so this is the deep structure of the
rational numbers it's a very deep and interesting
structure and there's probably a lot more to say
about it in fact next time we're going to look at
another aspect of it another very classical and
beautiful object or construction that's intimately
connected with this deep structure of the rational
numbers we look at the stern broco tree also going
back to the 19th century and it will give us yet
more insight into these rational numbers and the
beauty and the depth that they enjoy so please
give this some thought that is really rational
numbers which mathematics is all about when we
can orient ourselves in that direction that a
lot of doors open up in front of us and a lot
of new rich developments with a number theoretical
aspect become visible right so next time stir in
a broco tree I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening